[Music]
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of conversations with tom i am here for
a second round with donald hoffman
welcome back
thank you very much tom it's great to be
here dude i am so excited to spend more
time with you i was listening to the
first interview that we did which by the
way everybody you're going to want to
watch that one um to really understand
everything that donald's about we'll
give you a quick primer here but we're
going to cover new ground in this but
the reason that i'm so excited was
honestly man trying to wrap my head
around your take on consciousness and
the way that basically we're
living in a constructed reality that
we're essentially in the matrix whether
we want to be or not
and the i get that and i was into it and
i love it but some of the implications
of that have only hit me now that i've
had time to like you know take a step
back really think about it interact with
other people dealing with what they call
the hard problem of consciousness
so for us to be able to dive into that
though give people the like three minute
primer on
why your take is so different than
everybody else who takes a really sort
of physicality-based approach
to consciousness
right so most people who are looking at
how consciousness is related to the
physical world like our brain
are assuming that somehow the physical
world is primary it's the source of all
cause and effect in reality
and therefore
consciousness is an effect of physical
causes presumably
neural activity in the brain for example
but maybe also computer activity in a
artificial intelligence that's
sufficiently complicated
and my my take is that our best science
today
quantum field theory
einstein's theory of gravity
and evolution by natural selection all
three of our best
scientific theories today are telling us
that space time is not fundamental
and that physical objects in space time
are not fundamental reality and science
is good enough our best scientific
theories are good enough to tell us
where they stop
but they're not good enough of course to
tell us what's beyond that's up to us as
creative scientists to try to guess
what is a deeper theory of reality that
goes beyond space and time but
when we project it back into space and
time that deeper reality needs to look
like gravity and quantum field theory
and evolution by natural selection and
so
basically what i'm saying is that my my
brilliant colleagues
and these are my friends they're they're
brilliant i'm not they're not putting
them down anyway but when they assume
that physical objects like neurons or
computing systems cause consciousness i
think that they're running against what
our best scientific theories are telling
us they're telling us space time is
doomed we need a deeper
notion of reality and and
for most sciences no problem to work in
space time but when we're dealing with
consciousness
the fiction that physical objects have
genuine causal powers
which is a useful fiction most of the
time for everyday neuroscience it's a
very useful fiction i use it myself but
for consciousness that's when the
fiction comes back to bite you and just
just a quick idea if you're playing a
virtual reality game
like grand theft auto but in a vr souped
up multiplayer version it's a perfectly
useful fiction to think that the
steering wheel causes the car to move
around to the left or to the right and
so forth that's perfectly harmless
fiction but if you're a software
engineer looking to upgrade the actual
software that runs the program that
fiction if you were stuck in that
fiction you would not be equipped to do
the upgrade that you needed in other
words if you're trying to look at the
reality outside the headset
you can't just live with the notion of
cause and effect inside the headset you
actually have to expand your horizons to
understand a deeper notion of cause and
effect and that's what i claim we have
to do with consciousness it's useful
most of the time to talk about physical
objects as though they have causal
powers perfectly harmless but when it
comes to consciousness it's the single
big obstacle that's stopping progress in
its tracks okay
whoo you did it perfectly now i want to
like really drill into that quickly so
that people understand where we're going
to be going from here so uh we spent
almost two and a half hours together
last time with me doing with with my p
brain doing my best to grapple with
these topics
and finally i was able to understand a
couple things that i'm going to lay out
now that open up what this interview is
going to be about and it's going to be
very interesting we're going to cover
things like an ai and whether that
becomes conscious faster than light
travel which i think your theory
predicts
all kinds of
very interesting things so to say that
analogy in my own words maybe from a lay
perspective so people get what you're
saying about grand theft auto because
this is the key to understanding the
consequences of your theory
so when you think about what's really
going on as a computer programmer is
trying to make this game called grand
theft auto
you're dealing with algorithms and
mathematics and uh moving electrical
currents around a xbox or whatever and
so ultimately your goal is to
move
electrons and things like that around
this machine that then creates this
supposed experience right on a tv that i
can interact with okay when you
understand that
the re the difference between the
reality that that programmer has to deal
with which looks nothing like it it's
literally numbers it's all code all math
math designed to move electrons around
okay that's not exactly right but that's
close enough and that reality
versus what you see which is that oh
look i'm driving with the steering wheel
what you're saying is
what you see when you walk around the
room and interact with stuff and you
think about space time and einstein and
relativity is as divorced from reality
as the computer programmer is from the
gamer who plays his game
now it took me a very long time to
understand that's what you're trying to
get people to to understand
and then
it was one thing that was like a real
key in the lock for me was somebody
asked you a question it was so great and
they said
donald this is wonderful i love it but
now predict we have the same
conversation in 10 000 years what are we
gonna know then and you said oh that
space time isn't real and so we can
create space time ourselves because
space time is
space time is the grand theft auto game
it's not the code underneath so once you
understand einstein just figured out a
way to describe grand theft auto he did
not figure out a way to describe
the actual underlying code
and so if
if the space time is just grand theft
auto and we know we can manipulate grand
theft auto we can now manipulate space
time and you said we'll have this
conversation from alpha centauri and i
was like oh my god even if you
just get excited about the chills even
if you just get excited about our
ability to manipulate what's in the
headset
right manipulating space-time traveling
faster than light
changing fundamental physics things like
that
then even that would be interesting
let alone the other part that you're
saying which is oh you might actually be
able to figure out what the
underlying code
is
that's that's exactly right and and so
one way to think about it is
science
for all of its incredible breakthroughs
and wonderful theories
has only been studying our headset
science has not yet been studying
objective reality outside of our
space-time
virtual reality
that from an evolutionary point of view
was just evolved as a way for us to play
the game of life and stay alive long
enough to reproduce not to show us the
truth so we have really in the in the
last four or five centuries really
gotten to be
wizards
of our headset wizards of the grand
theft auto game but just because you're
a wizard of grand theft auto does not
mean that you know anything about the
circuits and software that are running
the game
and for someone who thinks that they
know everything when all they know is
grand theft auto means they they're
still stuck in the headset
science i want to claim has the tools we
have learned
the right tools as we've studied our
headset
we are ready to use those same tools to
venture outside the headset outside of
space and time so science has the right
tools we just have to open up you know
open our minds
to
the fact that we're just playing a game
inside space time it's just a virtual
reality there's an entire world out now
the best physicists
are already there
like nima arkani hamed and many of his
collaborators who are saying space time
is doomed we're looking for the reality
that's beyond space time in which in
fact the very language of quantum theory
and and relativity theory don't hold
there's there are no what they call
hilbert spaces so there's
no hilbert space there in what they're
finding there's no quantum theory you
need hillary's what is hilbert space
i've never heard of that oh it's it's a
mathematical
structure that is used to describe
quantum states
and their evolution it's called hilbert
space and so so what they're looking
you're saying they don't exist
that's right so these physicists are
saying look we're finding structures
beyond space-time and these structures
don't care about hilbert space and they
don't care about locality in space and
time they don't care about so-called
unitarity which is important for quantum
theory these are deeper structures they
project into space time and give us
unitary and locality unitarity and
locality in space-time in other words
they project to the right things in our
headset but they're deeper and they have
symmetries
that you cannot see in space time and
when physicists find symmetries
that are in the data but can't be
captured in space time they're very very
interested so so
the best and brightest physicists are
boldly stepping outside of the headset
but the question is
where do you look
what kinds of ideas i mean if it's not
space and time
how do you come up with an idea about
what reality is so we just have to try
ideas
make them rigorous make them precise and
then project them back into our headset
that's the key we know how to test
things within the headset so we're going
to make theories of reality outside of
space and time with mathematically
precise models of how they map into
space and time
and then we can test so so this is not
just waving your hands and blowing steam
you know this is not that this is we
want rigorous theories out outside of
space time that have mathematical
projections into space time that lead to
testable predictions
i right now
am studying
the physics of scattering amplitudes
for the like
colliders
so they smash protons together and they
have gluons smash into each other and
and gluons go flying out and you can
predict the the probability of these
these particle events
so my goal is to start with the theory
of consciousness outside of space time
mathematically precise show exactly how
it maps into space time and then
hopefully predict those scattering
amplitudes to 10 decimal predictions to
10 decimal places of accuracy
then it doesn't mean i'm right but at
least now i'm doing the right thing
to be testable
okay i want to
ground everybody in why i've gotten so
um hyped on this so do you read science
fiction much
a little bit
i'm mostly just very saddened by that
right now
very saddened to hear that but um
so one of the things that i find so
enjoyable about science fiction is they
really play with big ideas and i'm
reading a book
it's the second book in the three body
problem series and in that they're
basically alien invasion is happening
and they're trying to figure out like
what they do
and the way that the um aliens stop them
from making progress spoiler alert for
anybody who plans to read the series
is that they um
they send these photons that can
basically
interrupt the large colliders to give
them impossible to interpret data
and so they shoot these things um to the
colliders and they they just give them
completely nonsensical data and the
reason they said that is they're like if
you can't make
the the breakthroughs at the fundamental
layers of science you can't progress so
for anybody who is feeling like okay
these guys are drifting off into the
ether why is this interesting how does
it relate to
my life first of all say that you're a
cognitive scientist that you know is
your background so this starts with hey
i'm trying to understand consciousness
the hard problem of consciousness and
it's leading me to this place the
challenge is the very substance of
reality and that matters because by the
way we might be able to manipulate more
of this stuff than we think
but we're still in this um presentation
layer the the headset
so
now as i begin to
unwind some of this stuff it's
when we
think about the fact that okay
i'm guessing the scientists the quantum
scientists the reason that they're now
looking elsewhere is they cannot make
what they see mathematically make sense
with the models that they have
of space time
and
for them to make that leap outside is
going to be
brutally difficult in terms of science
doesn't progress as the truth is
revealed science progress i think it was
neil's bohr we talked about this last
summer plank that said basically the old
people have to die because they just
they can't update their model of the
world and then the next generation grows
up just believing it to be true
so
how
are we holding out hope for people to
step outside of that and what methods
are they using
to
discover this stuff is it going to be in
the collider because that's all headset
right so i can tell you what the
physicists are up to a little bit
on this and and why i'm interested as
you said
i'm not interested in particle physics
for its own sake i'm a cognitive
scientist
i'm looking for the simplest thing
that i could possibly do to test a
theory of consciousness in which
consciousness is fundamental and
space-time is just a headset
and i think you have to you have to
explain that we talked about in the last
one but it's it's worth it when you say
that
um consciousness is fundamental what do
you mean
all right so
so by consciousness i just mean simple
things like having a headache or
smelling garlic or hearing the sound of
a trumpet or having an itch
or or feeling a mood like you know love
or hate or something like that so simple
um
feelings or sensory experiences that i
could imagine even a mouse might have
like a mouse might smell cheese and it
might enjoy the taste of cheese i think
everybody can get behind that though but
aren't you taking it way farther down to
like there is an entity i don't know
what word to put around it its entire
experience is either green or nothing
right so so
i actually then
when i try to get a model of
consciousness on its own terms as a
scientist i have to write down a
mathematical description of what i mean
by having conscious experiences and
acting on them and and entertain the
possibility of very simple
consciousnesses that might have as you
say just one or two conscious
experiences like green or nothing or
something like that and look at that how
these kinds of consciousnesses might
interact and so forth and so i've been
with my colleagues jayton prakash and
and and chris fields and manish singh
and others working on mathematical
models
of
dynamics of consciousness it's much like
a vast social network like the
twitterverse we have lots of social
entities that are interacting tweeting
and following and so forth it would be
like that there's not just one
consciousness there are many what i call
conscious agents that are interacting um
and there's so many of them that it's
overwhelming
it's too much for any one conscious
agent to talk to all or interact with
all the other conscious agents and and
just like with social data
if you're you know like with the
twitterverse if you're trying to
understand what's happening there well
there's tens of millions of users
literally billions of tweets you can't
read the tweet all the tweets or
interact with all users if you want to
understand what's going on you need a
visualization tool maybe a vr headset
where you can sort of see what's
trending in the united states and then
zoom in to what's happening in moscow
and then zoom out to what's happening in
over in china and then zoom down to a
particular street and so what you want
is simple
graphics simple eye candy little objects
that are colored that are doing
different things that somehow lets you
grasp
what's
what the billions of tweets and tens of
millions of uh twitter users are doing
but in a way that you can so it's gotta
dumb things down put it in a colorful
simple eye candy format that you can
understand
and that's the big idea i'm claiming
that that's what space time is
space time
the sun and the moon physical objects
everything that we see inside of space
and time is just our visualization tool
the reality we're interacting with is
nothing like the visualization tool
there's nothing like space and time it's
a whole
network of interacting conscious agents
outside of space time a vast social
network
and we've made the rookie mistake
of assuming that our headset vr
our visualization tool is the final
reality it's just a rookie mistake it's
like someone who's played grand theft
auto so long they have no idea there's a
reality besides grand theft auto
we're like that right now all right so
let's go back to this idea of conscious
entities which i find interesting it
took me a while to grasp this one so
the easiest one is inside the human
brain right now there are two
hemispheres if you split the corpus
callosum we discussed this last time you
get two different personalities you've
also got the microbiome which
conceivably all the microbes are
conscious
and so when you uh inside of all of our
cells there's hundreds or even thousands
of mitochondria which are living
organisms inside of our cells so
it is very
um objectively true to look at a human
and say you're not a single entity you
are a collection
of
trillions of entities
that
we just
sum up is like that's donald right but
in reality it's not and if i go in and
mess with the consciousness like if i go
into mess with your microbiome it'll
change your personality which is crazy
and i can't believe it's true
but nonetheless is true i can affect
your energy output by going and messing
with your mitochondria which again have
their own dna it's not like it's just a
cell in your body this this is a
its own entity that happens to be inside
of your cells
and
as we
begin to
recognize that humans already are just a
collection of these much smaller
consciousness but they come together
i get where you're going now i don't yet
know the
implications of that or what we're going
to take away from it but my relationship
with you has been
like
hey this crazy statement that i can't
fathom is true i really want to write
you off as a nut job but i can't because
like all of these things like do make
sense it's just i so can't imagine what
life outside the headset is um but the
more time i have spent with the ideas
the more it's like okay these are
starting to coalesce for me um
so cool i just wanted people to
understand that consciousness thing i
don't i certainly don't understand it
yet how it exists outside of the headset
but i can't deny that already even in
the headset were a collection of smaller
consciousnesses
right maybe one help for thinking about
your consciousness outside the headset
i might have mentioned this last time
um if you just look at your face in the
mirror
if you look
what you see directly is just skin hair
and eyes
that's all that's all you see
and if you looked inside if someone
opened your skull up and look you just
see neurons and and so forth
but what you know firsthand that you
cannot see
is your hopes your dreams your
aspirations your love of music your your
mood
all the rich world of your conscious
experiences
compared to that rich world this face
is
unbelievably simple and nothing like
the world of your experiences if i smile
or you smile
i can guess that you're feeling joy but
a smile in no way resembles joy a smile
is a twitch of a face a joy
is that that's where it's like
the things we see happening in the
quantum realm that make no sense
that to you is the thing that tells you
your brain the physical tissues all of
that they are entirely in the vr
experience it's all vr experience that's
right and so strictly speaking
no physical object
including my body is conscious
strictly speaking
my brain isn't conscious because my
brain
in fact doesn't even exist unless i
render it
right so if you're playing grand theft
auto i'm playing a vr version i got the
steering wheel in front of me i'm
holding the steering wheel if i look to
the side i no longer render the steering
wheel and there is no steering wheel
when i look here i render it and now
there is a steering wheel the same thing
is true strictly speaking of neurons and
brains they're there when you render
them they're not there when you don't
it's a vr
system that you render objects in space
and time as you need them
because they're part of your
visualization tool and then you garbage
collect them you delete them when you
don't need them so strictly speaking no
physical object is conscious so so not
human bodies aren't conscious rocks
aren't conscious
um so i'm not a pan cyclist a pan
psychist is someone who you know at
least one version of pan psychism is
that you know there are physical objects
that obey the laws of physics and the
laws of physics are in some sense
fundamental but consciousness
is the reality that's inside the laws
and i'm saying something entirely
different i'm saying that the very laws
of physics themselves are really no
restraint to consciousness whatsoever
they're just a visualization tool that
certain consciousnesses happen to use
but they're no restriction on the nature
of consciousness itself itself at all
and so okay so before we move off that
um i know you don't know but i want you
you must um
have flashes of images or favorite
metaphors or whatever so if i buy that
this really is a simulation true true
true like is as simulated as it's going
to get down to the fact that space time
is just a part of that simulation
and it is consciousness that is
fundamental meaning that the complexity
of my brain will never give birth to
consciousness
my consciousness which is outside of the
the headset it's outside the vr world
it's outside the grand theft auto game
right that thing has a need
to
from a evolutionary standpoint based on
the gains it gets from certain behaviors
it needed to create
a virtual reality so
that it wasn't overwhelmed with data
so what is that
conscious being that was evolving
as it sits outside of this where where
can i scrape through and find the
conscious thing
right so so well the consciousness won't
be inside space and time understood
instead space and time is inside
consciousness yep i get that but i'm
still imagining a little person
outside of the vr is that just
fundamentally broken uh no i would say
that that probably given the current
state of human imagination including
mine that's probably the best thing that
we can do is to think about these
entities and of course as soon as we
think about entities we place them in
space and time we that's how we think so
so it's harmless to do that as long as
you realize that the space that you're
thinking about isn't
they're not embedded in space they're
the creators of space that's that's the
interesting thing so it's hard for
outside space and time i am eating
things right
well so so inside space so i don't know
what we're doing outside of space and
time that's part of what i want to
understand is what are we actually doing
we don't see i don't know what i'm
actually doing i know what i'm doing
under a description like i'm moving my
hand right now and if i grab a steering
wheel in my car i know what i'm doing
under a space-time description but i
don't know
in ultimate reality what i'm really
doing it's just like the vr player when
they turn the steering wheel in grand
theft auto they know
what they're doing in the language of
the game i'm turning a steering wheel
but what they're really doing in terms
of the super computer right which in
that metaphor would be the deeper
reality they're toggling voltages and
magnetic fields and circuits that they
have no idea there's there's probably
trillions of voltage togglings going on
for one turn of the wheel all they see
is a turn of the wheel that's their
notion of cause and effect it's trivial
the real cause and effect is trillions
of voltages getting toggled in some
you know in fractions of a second it's
much much more complicated so from an
evolutionary so when we talk about
evolution as you did
we have to be from this point of view
it's very very important to be careful
because
um now we have to talk about what part
of the framework we're talking about so
when i talk evolution
i'm only going to be talking about
assuming the headset now i'm within the
framework of the headset because
evolutionary theory is only a headset
theory
it's not a theory of consciousness
beyond space and time okay this is where
things start to break a little for me so
i'm gonna articulate what i think you
have said
um about because all of this was born
for you you basically said you have two
choices you can either keep space time
and get rid of evolution or you can keep
evolution and get rid of space time and
your argument goes like this and
obviously stop me where i go wrong
that all evolution cares about is
fitness payoffs there are certain
behaviors that must be taken in order
for you to have children that have
children
and there's so much data coming in
that like looking at a desk or a table
or something would simply be a string of
numbers that dictate the number of
photons reflecting off that coming back
and you could interpret that as
different colors and brightness and all
that but in reality it is just the math
of that situation
and what you see around you is something
to simplify that so that you only have
to render what you're looking at when
you look away it ceases to exist there's
just the overwhelming complexity it
would paralyze any animal so the
evolutionary strategy that was chosen is
this crazy simplification that we exist
in which is very convincing but it's
ultimately a convincing lie and isn't
real so i'm like okay cool i can
actually get behind that
where it breaks down for me is
what's actually evolving like something
needed this simplification what is that
something right so there's so there's
got to be a deeper dynamics right
there's some deeper dynamics that in
space time looks like evolution but
natural selection that's what it looks
like inside of our headset but but there
has to be some deeper dynamics and i
i've only had one idea
that i've run across that seems deep
enough i'm not saying it's right
but it's there's at least but but this
idea will tell you how deep we have to
go to at least get a contender so if
consciousness is doing something if it's
quote unquote evolving but not from a
natural selection point of view just so
by evolving i just mean it has some kind
of dynamics and the question is why what
what is it up to you what is
consciousness up to
right because now that the typical stuff
of trying to get food and and
procreation that that doesn't apply
outside of space and time presumably
right it need not might not apply so
what's the deeper thing
the only idea that i've seen that's deep
enough um
comes from something called girdles and
completeness theorem yeah i struggled
with this in the last interview now i
think i have it mastered
oh okay well well then you're better
than me because girls girdle's there was
unbelievable indeed but um but but
basically what girdle said without going
into the details is there is no end
in principle no end to the exploration
of novel mathematical structure
even quote unquote god could never know
it all it's there's always going to be
an unbounded inquiry ahead no matter how
much you know there's unbounded
structure left to explore
and if we make the assumption and and
now i'm just speaking as a scientist
like saying look i don't know what the
truth is we put some ideas on the table
and see where they go right that's
that's how you do science so maybe
everything i'm saying is wrong but i'm
trying to be precise so we can figure
out where it's from so if we assume
that consciousness is all is really the
fundamental reality a bunch of these
conscious agents this social network
and if that's all that there really is
then the only thing that mathematical
structure can be about
is consciousness
that's all it's about because that's all
there is so girdle's theorem then would
say
because there's an unbounded and
never-ending possibility for exploration
of mathematical structure
that means there's a never-ending and
unbounded possibility for the
exploration of varieties of conscious
experience
in other words consciousness
is like a kid in a candy store
it but it's an infinite candy store i
call it girdles candy store it's a
never-ending exploration that is in
principle
never-ending
it's not like you can ever come to the
end of it and so
that is deepening i'm not saying it's
right but it's deep enough to be a real
contender why should consciousness be
doing every anything at all well here's
one reason
because no matter how much consciousness
explores its possibilities it could
never come to the end of its own
possibilities and so it's in a
never-ending
self-exploration
and what you we call tom and don are
just parts
of this overall exploration
of of consciousness and all of its
possibilities and you know
our little bit that we're exploring
right now
as rich as it seems to us
is trivial
literally
trivial compared to all the
possibilities that girdle says are out
there and we get some feeling of the
triviality but i can imagine a
square
i can imagine a cube
now go up one more dimension imagine a
cube in four dimensions
my brain halts and my mind catches on
fire nothing happens that's only four
dimensions i can't even go to four
dimensions i mean how
that that's terrible is it's just an
incredible limitation i can only see
three dimensions of color red
you know sort of a
red green dimension blue yellow and and
and so forth
light and dark we have three cone
systems and so forth there are some
pigeons that have four color receptors
presumably they're in an extra dimension
of color that i can't even imagine what
it's like can you imagine a specific
color you've never seen before right try
to imagine one specific color you've
never
so
as rich as our world seem we know that
there's
a rich possibility of conscious
experiences that we can't even
concretely imagine but consciousness
itself
on this theory is exploring all these
possibilities and right now we're sort
of stuck on this little headset
three dimensions
small amount of color that we can see
and so forth
we thought it was the whole world no
it's just it's a little headset it's a
it's a prism
right it's it's it's for me i realized
i'm sort of stuck i mean this is like my
imagination is stuck in only three
dimensions my colors are stuck in a
certain range
consciousness itself is exploring the
vast possibilities of
that's going on so that
now here's the challenge suppose we
chase that down so we say okay there's
going to be this
ongoing dynamics of consciousness
constantly
going beyond what it knows
exploring the candy store further and
further
well there's several things to say about
that one is
that's not the candy store makes it
sound like all fun and games right whoa
but there's going to be a
a dark side to it because going into the
unknown means letting go of what you
know
and that can be terrifying so this
suggests that consciousness is going to
have
this thing going on all the time of the
exhilaration
and the terror
of going literally into the unknown
where literally you don't have concepts
all of your current concepts
are inadequate and this is what what
girdles
is saying what these are going to be new
structures that that transcend so for
those who meditate i mean when you go
into silence
it's both healing and terrifying right
if you really let go of all thoughts
you can go into the void
it's it's sort of it can be scary like
you want to go back into you grab back
on your it's a life jacket right you
grab on to your teddy bear your thoughts
so there's going to be this
to really go into
new conceptual frontiers you have to let
go of old concepts so there's going to
be that aspect to it which is sort of a
spiritual side but there's no
i think so
i i think that what's the central
question for you so and i'll prime you
by telling you my essential question
sure the central question in all of this
that i find interesting is what is the
correlate
so
um
i i'm in this vr experience
to the advantage of something and i want
to know what that something is
it isn't me as i perceive me um but it's
something
right
so what's your essential question right
right the well the answer is i i don't
know but
and so there's no specific thing that
you're chasing
well what i'm chasing is the idea that
that we're chasing that the
consciousness itself
is only about
exploring new possibilities of
experience
okay so i'm going to push on that you
let's go into the way that ai
researchers think and work and i know
that was your degree so this ought to be
i'm taking you right home
um
you have to imbue
the robot with directives desires right
so to put it in human terms it's like
there are certain things that humans
want to do we um we're an active species
so we tend to go and explore
we try to take control of our
environment we certainly eat procreate
like all those we have the drive to
quench thirst hunger sex so on and so
forth so like those things are pushing
us to go do things even if we don't want
to we find ourselves compelled to
seek pleasure to move away from pain all
right by default ai wouldn't have those
so now you've got to give those those
things and i love that concept of
minus a desire any entity just sits or
is blown around by
um
physics right so
obviously we're in the headset now but
like you've got wind and so okay
something lighter than the wind is is
going to move but otherwise everything
just sits
so what is it
like
what
how has this conscious entity in that
question that you just posed
been given some sort of impetus to
explore the infinite candies in the
infinite candy shop
well
by the way i'm on board with what you're
saying i think that that's really a good
way of thinking about this and that you
could think about our
your life in my life right now is we're
in a simulator a space time simulator
and we've been given like an ai system
we've been given
certain
intrinsic
desires
that we then find and so so so my wife
is an artist
that's how she's exploring i i am still
stuck at third grade stick figures so
that's not how i'm exploring
i'm exploring in a different way so so
so there's billions of humans
and there are billions of different ways
that we explore in music and art and
literature in science various kinds of
science meditation sober it's sports
there are all sorts of ways that
consciousness is exploring um through
through us and there is not like one is
the best
or the what makes consciousness want to
go to all the assay to create this vr
experience to run
each of us as sort of an individual
experience
in consciousness
the idea would be that that is what
consciousness is about is
the exploration of all of its
possibilities so is that just the
miracle like i've now hit the part where
you're like i don't [__] know this is
the miracle
well
yeah and when we when we say that
um
that's something that we have to say is
true of any explanation right
any explanation at some point
we say if you grant me these
assumptions
then with those assumptions i can
explain everything else so and i totally
buy into that here here is the base
assumption i've always made about the
miracle that the whole point is to say
hey everybody i've got this theory
here's my miracle check it out theory
works right yeah yeah wow this is better
than everything okay the only reason
i've told you about this thing is so you
can tell me how to move the miracle back
even farther
or are you just like cool i'm good with
that miracle and now i just want to
explore
within that where that miracle is or
well so i want to do both so so for this
this miracle is so new that i you know i
need to explore it a little bit right
so so i want to push on this one but but
the miracles i'm proposing are
consciousness is fundamental so
experiences
themselves don't come from physics
they are fundamental so that's a miracle
and second um this other miracle that
that girdle proved
where he proved it but it's still a
miracle right
the incompleteness of mathematics that
you can that there's endless exploration
that's just a fact which is a remarkable
fact we proved it but it's nevertheless
this why should the universe be that way
why should logic demand that that's
so that's but it's a satisfying kind of
end point
where
we say that's the way the world is
here's the theorem
that says that's the way the universe is
and that that one theorem tells us why
if you're up to exploration
then have fun because you will always
there's no getting there that's the key
there's no arriving
girdles incompleteness theorem in a real
world example because this one anybody
that watches the first episode i must
ask you 75 questions about this theorem
and i just could not get my head around
it and now
uh the punch line is as far as i can
tell it's turtles all the way down so
um
girdles incompleteness theorem as i
understand it says no matter how much
you use math to try to find base reality
you will never find it there is no end
there will always be another layer to
discover on and on and on and on and on
literally for infinity
right so so i can say a little bit more
about what what girdle was up to on that
and how it relates so so girdle was
the question they were asking it was a
mathematical question that is if you
write down a bunch of axioms right some
these things are true these things are
just give me a two points
define a line
two lines intersect give me a few things
like that and then you ask what are all
the theorems that you could prove
from those assumptions
and and so you know so we did all this
in high school algebra and so forth we
would you know prove different things
what girdles the big question that
mathematicians had david hilbert really
put put this out there was
can we
with just grinding through
these theorems and proofs
get all mathematical truth
is that there's some finite number
there's maybe it's 6.7 million but we
can do it
even if it's infinite in principle if we
could just grind forever would we get
all the truths and that was so hilbert
asked that question and girdle showed
that the answer is no that no matter
how big your axiom system is how many
axioms you've got he found a way
to show here's something that's true
but you can't prove it within your
axioms so now
so you can take that new truth stick it
as one of your axioms and then you show
well there'll be another truth
that now pops up and so this nev never
ends and so
so no matter how so you can't just
mechanically grind through and get all
the truths
and the key thing about this which is
really interesting for consciousness now
is girdle used
self-reference
it's when you get a mathematical system
to talk about itself
that the problems start to arise
and that's really interesting it because
what i'm suggesting here is that
consciousness
is trying to understand itself in all of
its possibilities
and
because of that self-reference
it's a never-ending enterprise
and you seem to sort of quietly draw a
parallel between math and consciousness
are they separable or inseparable
that's a really deep and important
question
i don't know here's here's just my
thoughts
my
i study psychophysics which is a branch
of science which we experimentally and
mathematically
study conscious experiences your
perceptions of shape and color and so
forth we write down math models and we
test people in in the lab
every conscious experience
has
structure we can write down mathematical
structure i've never seen a conscious
experience that doesn't have
mathematical structure and the
structures derive from what what neurons
are firing and things like that um well
it sometimes has nothing to do with
neurons at all
for example in color space you can talk
about it it seems like
red and orange are closer to each other
than red and green
that's an a structural notion and we can
write we can write down what we call
color spaces and they turn out to be
these non-euclidean color spaces tarot
window and others who did the
mathematics on on this
come up with these really interesting
complicated mathematical spaces which
model um all the
relationships of colors to each other so
we have color experience and their
structure um when you see a shape
like a ball
we can write down equations that model
the 3d shape that you're experiencing
so there's an intimate connection
that's been
studied scientifically between conscious
experience and mathematics the way i
think of it is that
consciousness
is to mathematics like the living
organism is to its bones
for if you're a vertebrate you need the
bones
but you're more than the bones
and and so that's why i think about
consciousness can't be reduced to
mathematics i don't think there are
others like tegmark who would say that
everything can be reduced to to
mathematics max tegmark says that kind
of thing uh you know he may be right but
that's not what i'm saying i'm saying
that mathematics is the structural
aspect of conscious experience but
there's more to the conscious experience
than just the structure in part because
um so far as we know
different kinds of conscious experiences
can be structurally identical
so if and if that's the case meaning
that uh uh
something with the same structure could
have different qualia it feels exactly
right
that's right
so is that context dependent
how
see well that's now where i'm getting to
the edge of my understanding here it's
it's i did actually prove a theorem it's
called the scrambling theorem and i
published it in 2006 where i proved that
that your colors could be scrambled with
respect to mine
but we would be functionally identical
in every single experiment we could do
so there was no
structural thing that i could do to
show that your color experiences were
different from my color experiences so
so your experiences aren't devoid of
mathematical structure but
the mathematical structure isn't the
whole story about your conscious
experiences that that's the best i can
say right now and i agree with you if if
that feels like we need to press further
on that i couldn't agree more we do need
to press further on that and and i look
forward
to because i think there some profound
insights are yet to be revealed
so where this all to me i'm so curious
like i'm always trying to find how is
something usable right how does this
come back so
um
if it reveals something about myself and
how i can move through the world in a
way that's more interesting more
fulfilling more whatever
um if it actually the the big thing
between last one and this one was the
idea that space-time is as malleable as
video game code and that we really could
even though it would only be an
experience in the headset that suddenly
things within the headset like faster
than light travel
suddenly become very real we just have
to figure out what the real substance of
the
headset code is so that we can get in
there and begin to um make changes
but that to me forces the question of
the me that i perceive as me is
inherently an object of the
uh the headset so there is there is no
me outside of the headset but there is
something outside of the headset and i
don't know if if our minds maybe just
work so fundamentally differently but as
we talk about this is what i started
imagining oh okay hey tom this is a
collection of different um
conscious beings and consciousness is
the
the you know the driving force and it's
running through all these
experimentations and so i'm like okay
cool
uh there's this thing underneath the 3d
and it's you know essentially popping up
all these different well let me see what
the color blue would be like for a kid
that grew up in tacoma washington and
went to harvard elementary you know what
i mean and like oh that's interesting
and then but like needed my entire sort
of life and universe to go for it to
truly be an infinite exploration of what
these different things so there's a me
that they spun up just to know the color
blue at the age of 44. you know what i
mean half with this exact history and
then there's oh over here i'm going to
do that same test but i want to know
what salmon tastes like when you had the
early bad experience with salmon as a
kid but later you fall in love with this
girl who's really into salmon what a
salmon taste like then and so
that's like where my mind goes right and
so now i'm imagining
like this
consciousness of some kind maybe it too
is the borg and you know maybe the borg
is what's feeding its drivers and all of
that but i'm still trying to imagine
like my brain immediately goes to
there's a thing
and that thing in my mind is basically
the most classic looking alien ever but
they have like these long fingers that
like each finger is uh an entity that
becomes this uh a conscious entity
living in the the headset just to go oh
cool that's what that experience is like
do you have any sort of
analogy metaphor that you think about
this stuff in or is this just because i
have a limited brain i'm not sure no i i
i love your metaphor and i don't have a
better one
and
i you know
there's a couple things to say about
that metaphor though which is um
one
in some sense you know a lot of
spiritual teachers tell us to relax and
enjoy the ride
right don't get all anxious don't get
all bent out of shape and so forth rich
or poor whatever you might be enjoy the
ride and in some sense when you do that
it feels right i mean it feels like i
mean of course i'm i'm i'm exploring i'm
not being lazy i'm not but but but
there's there's something about hey you
know smell the roses enjoy this thing
you know you don't want to come to the
end of your life and and and not have
really enjoyed the ride and and so the
idea that that it's it's about
not arriving anywhere
but but the joy of exploring for its own
sake that that's one thing that's on the
table here is it is that what it's about
now there's another thing that i've put
on the table though which is
of course
we should be very modest about all of
our claims here i'm probably wrong right
about about all of this right and but as
a scientist what i want to do then is to
say well how can we go about trying to
figure out where we're wrong as fast as
possible and for me what i'm doing i
mean while i'm exploring these ideas
that we're talking about
i'm also trying to say how would
consciousness
precisely this this vast social network
project mathematically into space time
clearly there's a projection i'm
interacting with
tom's consciousness i'm not seeing that
consciousness i'm seeing skin hair and
eyes i'm seeing a space-time projection
i'm not actually seeing your emotions
i'm not seeing your mood
but i am
genuinely interacting with your
experiences it's a genuine interaction
and so there is a projection from this
conscious realm
into space-time
i want to get a mathematically precise
model of that projection the thing about
gluons in this
large hadron collider predicting that is
just not because i'm so interested in
gluons is just to make sure that i'm not
bsing myself did i get the mapping
right if i can't predict blue on
interactions then i still have my
homework to do but now once i get that
here's the kicker
we can take what we understand in the
headset and pull it
backwards if we can project from
consciousness to the headset then we can
try at least to go from the headset and
pull backwards it's a fallible
enterprise but it may
help us
to
open our minds
to the possibilities for deeper theories
of what's going on outside the headset
so so the reason i'm doing this is
because
i
i can't even imagine a specific color
that i've never seen before i can't
imagine in four dimensions in other
words i take it as a given
that i'm
deeply
deeply limited in my imagination
and i need all the tools i can get to
help me step outside of my headset and
try to guess
the unfathomable outside of there so
that's why we want to get this
mathematically precise mapping into
space time and then pull it back
to to give us a guide that can help us
to not just be wildly speculating about
what's going on in the realm of
consciousness but to have
more tailored ideas that we can
test in a loop i get ideas
in my headset i pull them back to what
they might mean outside the headset
take those ideas play with them project
them back into the headset to get new
predictions so in other words we
if we don't want to bs ourselves we have
to figure out a way to make this an
experimental
scientific enterprise and that's the
loop but this is a bigger scientific
loop it goes outside the space-time
headset to a theory of what's going on
in consciousness
projecting back into space-time which is
the only place where we know that how to
do experiments and going through that
loop so science is up to the task
but
here's the kicker for me as a scientist
this approach says there will be no
theory of everything
why not because gurdwell's theorem says
you just said there's two more you can't
bring it all together any theorists can
have a finite set of assumptions
and the implications of that will be
finite yeah well we'll be you could have
such a
a deep theory of so many things
that
i mean it's there's always a new sort of
theorem to discover
but does that in any way shape or form
break because here's here's my
understanding of why people are
searching for a theory of everything
you've got einstein
newton dealing with the
macro world and then you've got the
quantum dealing with the microscopic
world and for whatever reason all of
your predictive models from things are
big they work just fine all of your
modeling when it's small works just fine
but when you try to make either one of
them work together then it falls apart
but
we are
i could see sort of closing the loop on
that that becomes an everything right
even though it's actually just a very
small subset right it's the headset and
so it's not the you know the true theory
of everything but if it allows you to
unify sort of the known universe
that seems like it would be incredibly
useful and i'm assuming there's some
there is something for us to understand
like that loop you were talking about
that goes and takes in consciousness
comes back into the headset that we
could create a loop so i'll i'll make
this more concrete again thinking maybe
more as a writer than as
a physicist for sure but so
when i was thinking about okay the big
bang and things expand what are they
expanding into
um and
the idea that a universe could sort of
pop in and out of existing like how's
all this possible
and
one idea that's put forth is that
basically
the the everything so i'll hesitate to
call it the universe but the everything
whatever that is is like a foam
and every bubble is a universe and the
bubbles sort of come and go and you're
in the bubble all you see is the bubble
the bubble to you seems like everything
but if you were to actually puncture
through that bubble out now i'm in the
you know the bigger matrix of stuff
and so you you begin to understand how
you get a temporary limitation
but actually then once you see what's
beyond you like oh i get it and then
girdle's incompleteness theorem answers
the question of okay but what's that
goop sitting in oh it's sitting in this
space what's that space sitting oh it's
sitting in this oh [__] girdle right
and you're just like
it goes on and on forever
but you would
like at some point being able to predict
seven
you know bubbles on it's like ah do i
really need to go to the infinite
there's just as long as if the
you poke through one bubble and all of a
sudden all physics are backwards and it
doesn't make sense okay that would be
problematic but assuming you're just
puncturing through to the next thing
that's exactly like where you currently
are
seems like you could come up with
something
unifying-ish
right so instead of turtles all the way
down as girdles all the way down right
it's just
endless exploration and girdle's theorem
could be like the deep meta theory it's
not the theory of everything it's sort
of a meta theory that tells us why
we will constantly be exploring for new
theories so if if you were looking for
the deepest theory from this point of
view maybe i'd not think about it but
maybe girdle's theorem would be this
meta theory that explains why all the
concrete theories will never be the
final theory of everything
and so in that sense maybe we with with
girdle we have i mean a candidate for
this meta theory of everything um and
which which explains why
um the joy of exploration
will never cease um
which is
an interesting
but i i agree this is a really
interesting thing to to to try to
understand the scientists and and
we can use some of the tools that we've
been learning from um deep learning so
deep neural networks and so forth where
you we get the agent-based models of
interaction for exploration and learning
so those those tools that like deepmind
um at google
um has some papers recently where they
they've come to the same conclusion that
my team has come from evolution they
found that instead of giving deep neural
networks
a strict model of the world that they
want them to make reasons in order to
make guesses in or to live in
um they just give them as you were
saying some
some payoffs some you know
positive and negative rewards for their
behaviors
and they don't tell them about the world
they just let the
the deep neural network
explore explore and they build their own
worlds and it turns out they don't build
worlds which mimic the truth they build
virtual realities which are a
dumbed-down user interface that let them
get the most rewards um and they don't
see the truth so we actually so there's
some papers i can give you a link to
some papers some from deepmind in the
last couple of years where they've
stumbled onto the same thing that
evolution
has stumbled onto that that um you know
the exploration never leads to the truth
that leads to
this the uneasy interface which sort of
doesn't maximize but which satisfices it
gives you what you need to
in terms of the rewards
and i would like to say one thing that
an objection that people will have at
this point some people go
yeah
this is crazy
um of course we see the truth i i know
enough truth not to get hit by that car
and we know enough truth to build
computers and to to send rockets to the
moon so this is completely enough to say
that we we don't know the truth and and
from what we've said now people might be
able to understand what i'm about to say
or guess what i'm about to say it's sort
of like if you were um in one of the
really neat little programs right now
that um
where you can build stuff so they're
they're they're building games like you
know roblox or trove or or fortnite or
minecraft and and you know you can
you can become a master
in one of those worlds right
and
and so you might see you can imagine a
person saying well what do you mean i'm
not in reality i can build these
wonderful worlds i can build all these
tools i can do all this great stuff in
minecraft or rope you know in these
various worlds of course but
and yeah within that quote-unquote
reality of minecraft yes
you're seeing that reality and you are
building things in that reality and it
requires intelligence and so forth but
you're not seeing again the circuits and
the software and the voltages that's the
real reality outside your minecraft
world and so that's that's
that's the answer to someone who says
well i know enough about reality not to
get hit by a car and to build a computer
and to send you know rockets to the moon
yes well you're in your minecraft world
and we've become very very good at that
minecraft world
but it's still a rookie mistake not to
realize that minecraft is just minecraft
is not the final reality and so so the
kinds of arguments that really hold a
lot of psychological weight and the
reason i mean i'm talking about this is
these ideas really grip our imagination
and it's hard for us to let go of them
so that's that's why i want to bring
that that up so talk to me so you've got
so many people trying to get to general
artificial intelligence you have elon
musk going around warning people hey
you're going to make something that is
going to be so much smarter than you
which is absolutely going to
rip uh the planet apart
um
you've got people talking about ai
becoming conscious
in your
understanding of what consciousness
really is as a fundamental element
could a
robot or an ai ever become conscious
well
the answer is not in the way that it's
typically thought but in a completely
different way yes but in the way that is
typically thought absolutely not and so
how do people typically think of it
right so so it's
the way it's typically thought of is
again within a physicalist framework so
space-time and particles and energy are
fundamental everything is made of quarks
and gluons and protons and neutrons and
so forth and and you know it's the big
bang story big bang was 13.8 billion
years ago space-time emerged particles
and energy
and there was no life
for hundreds of millions billions of
years
no consciousness for maybe hundreds of
millions billions of years after that so
consciousness and life are late comers
they're not fundamental from that point
of view
the right way to think about things is
how does matter and particles get into
complicated enough patterns of
interaction such that life and then
consciousness emerge from that framework
that's the right way to think about it
i'm rejecting the entire framework space
time is doomed that whole framework is
the wrong framework
but
and and it's not me as a cognitive
scientist saying i'm saying it's
physics it's physicists are saying space
time is doomed like nema arkani hamad
and and others are saying that because
of gravity and quantum field theory and
the way they interact
there are no local observables in space
time
none in our space time there is nothing
that can be precisely measured anywhere
in our space time
in other words space-time
is an inadequate framework
for what we need to do if we're as
scientists it's just the wrong framework
there's got to be a deeper framework and
space time has to be emergent
so the whole reductionist paradigm
is wrong
the reason so reductionism is the idea
that
to understand complicated things like
you and me
we need to understand simpler things
like chemical chemicals and to
understand them we need to understand
even simpler things like just particles
as we go down to smaller and smaller
regions of space and time
we get to the better
better understanding the more
fundamental principles that's sort of
the rejectionist
by the way that's been spectacularly
successful
for centuries
um and we owe our
current science to the success of
reductionism so i'm not against
reductionism it's been
successful it's worked
so far because we've been studying our
headset and it's true that as you go
closer and closer to quote-unquote the
pixels of your headset you're
understanding more and more
fundamentally how the headset works i'm
not saying that space-time has pixels by
the way i mean physicists would say
um that would violate laurence and
branch there are no pixels of space time
that
space time just ceases to make any sense
at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters 10 to
the minus 43 seconds it just falls apart
it's not that there are pixels it just
makes no sense
so reductionism worked
but it stops because space time isn't
fundamental
and so the very notion of smaller ceases
to be operational there is no no smaller
in fact as you try to probe smaller and
smaller past 10 to the minus 33 you you
create black holes that just get bigger
and bigger and bigger so you you
literally reductionism
literally blows up in your face in
physics it blows up in the form of a
black hole so reductionism has worked
but reducing consciousness so we're
trying so my brilliant colleagues and
these are my good friends who are
working on this right in cognitive
neuroscience they're trying to reduce
consciousness to
patterns of matter so there's integrated
information theory
causal computational architectures that
have certain kind of integrated
information the claim is they're
identical or give rise to consciousness
or penrose and hammeroff
there are certain quantum
states in microtubules that if you have
a coherent gravitational collapse of
these orchestrated collapse of these
somehow consciousness arises or there's
a global neuronal workspace if you have
the right broadcasting architecture for
certain kinds of information then that
becomes conscious so these are all
reductionist
theories of consciousness you start with
space-time and physical stuff
and somehow consciousness emerges i'm
saying
as those those guys are incredibly
brilliant
but
because space-time is doomed
all approaches to consciousness which
assume that space-time isn't doomed
which assumes that space-time and matter
are fundamental are themselves doomed
those so those approaches to
consciousness just haven't really
understood what the physicists are
telling us and what i'm claiming
evolution of natural selection is
telling us
space-time is the wrong language
particles are the wrong language the
only reason reductionism has worked is
because we were studying our headset and
in the headset yes going smaller and
smaller in the headset worked up to a
point until the very notion of small
ceased to make any sense and that's
where it stopped
so
where do we so with ai now so this is a
long way to your question but but
i can't answer your questions simply
because the the issues are so deep here
sure so with with
the standard view of ai in consciousness
is of course
we can build machines that will be
conscious
the brain is a machine
and it's conscious
so we we have a real example here's a
carbon-based machine inside your own
head that's creating consciousness so
who cares if it's carbon or silicon
we can build a machine with the right so
we're just trying to reverse engineer
the dynamical patterns of neural
networks in the brain or microtubule
quantum collapses whatever they might be
whatever the physical
magic is that somehow gives rise to
consciousness
will will do that i'm saying that all of
those approaches can't work because
space time is done
okay so before we move on from that
so but we can create new consciousness
right if my wife and i get together it's
a loving night it's warm
nine months later we've got uh a new
consciousness
so
how is that not are you saying that all
the elements from the egg and the sperm
all of it there was consciousness there
the whole time and so there is no point
where it just gets the cells divide
sufficiently such that consciousness
arises it's been conscious the whole
time
well so remember that
cells and eggs and sperms and so forth
are just
icons in our interface yes they
themselves have no consciousness
themselves
there there's little symbols
that we use as pointers to a realm of
consciousness that we have to reverse
engineer to figure out what's going on
what is there a moment though where the
realm of consciousness goes i am now
inserting the consciousness element
into this child well yeah
i think so in in
the well
into the our interface
inserting the conscience into our
interface
yes but they're inserting the
consciousness into
that specific part of our interface
which at this moment is a an infant or a
zygote or wherever whatever point
consciousness is imbued
right yeah i would say that yeah i would
agree i would say that there's a point
in which a new portal
in our interfaces is opened up into
consciousness so so for example
i have a portal into tom's consciousness
it's it's it's not
perfect it's fallible
but it's real i can guess if you're
interested i can guess if you're you
know if you're hurting or i can guess
it's a but it's a genuine portal into
your consciousness and but but of course
my experience is not your consciousness
your consciousness is is separate and so
our interface does give us genuine
portals into the consciousness of others
my cat i have less access my
a mouse even less and uh you know
microbe
my interface has given up my portal has
become really dumb it's not because
there's no consciousness out there is
that my portal is is got too much noise
or just not opened up to him so so yes
when we have babies
we are in a way that we don't understand
opening new portals
into the realm of consciousness
i so i want to understand that it's it's
very much like if someone is building
something in minecraft and you know they
put things together
but if if you're really inquisitive
you'd like to know what was really going
on inside the computer
that looks like me building this thing
that i see in my minecraft world and
that's that's what i want to do so in
minecraft there are different things
that are in some sense portals to a
whole bunch of code that's going on in
the computer that's allowing me to build
this stuff
okay let me start making some guesses
here on where you're going
so i'm assuming that you're chasing this
problem because ultimately you want to
be able to figure out hey guys guess
what space time is fundamentally the
wrong way to look at it and if we get
the right way to look at it we will have
all just an avalanche of insights maybe
usable in the way that quantum
discoveries have given birth to modern
life most people don't put two and two
together they just think uh the you know
maybe the atomic bomb or something like
that but that there's really your cell
phones gps like all of it has to do with
um physics
so if we can get to the
the underlying physics of whatever gives
birth to the um the simulation
now we could have a whole new avalanche
of insights that allow us greater
manipulation of the world or
whatever it is precisely that's driving
you which brings me back to the collider
you're paying attention to that because
you if i understand how these things
explode then i can backtrack it and
understand how they came together in the
first place which in your prediction is
going to take us outside of the
simulation into the world of
consciousness
which do you imagine that world has
physics and desires like does the
the consciousness must have something
propelling it to do things
right the the only idea i've got there
is this idea of a girdle of just
infinite exploration
that is the okay so this is going to
bring us to god here because i feel like
you've already said this is a magic
moment or a miracle moment so
something has
given the spark of
desire to consciousness to explore
girdles infinite like look at all the
different manifestations that
consciousness can take and so we are all
but one sort of
pop-up of
a very specific kind of consciousness
and who knows there could be a brazilian
of these things all over
the known and unknown universe um
right so
as we're
doing that it begs the question of in
your mind is there such a thing as god
well this gives us possibly
the
a chance to have a language
which for the first time ever we might
be able to formulate a precise
hypothesis about what we mean by the
word god
and start to do science so for example
do you have a hypothesis around that
well yes so i have a precise definition
of a conscious agent
and what one definition i could give for
god would be um the agent
which is the combination of all
the conscious agents the single so so
suppose it turns out that mathematically
when i look at the mathematics of
conscious agents and how they combine to
form new agents
suppose that the mathematics tells me
there is in some sense always one
largest agent that's being formed i
don't know if that will be the case i
don't know but but suppose then i could
say that that's gone
suppose it turns out that no
what's going on is that there are many
many quote unquote maximal agents but
there's no single maximal agent and
they're not i identical then that would
then there it might be a polytheism
but the nice thing about this is
we could see the word god has been used
in contradictory ways for thousands of
years by various traditions and and
we fight to the death
over a term literally
that's not well defined because your god
is not the same as my god
and and this is it's a tragedy
um of human
history that hundreds of millions of
people have been have died in because of
differences over what we mean by the
word god and and what i would like to
see is
sort of
a humble approach to that that term
saying look no we my tradition has its
ideas your tradition has its ideas
clearly since we all disagree at most
one of us is right and and possibly all
of us are wrong so why don't we
come together take all of our best ideas
and then try to sift through
and here's where science can help where
we take the ideas and try to make them
precise mathematically precise because
that's when you find out if things gel
if they're consistent or if they
actually
you're talking nonsense right you know
if you say
a is true and not a is true well you're
talking nonsense right so
so can we do something like that
and
evolve
ideas about the notion of god and have a
scientific spirituality where where god
becomes
something that we're we don't assume
that we know we're not dogmatic i know
what god is we're humble we say these
are the best ideas we've got so far
let's
try to make them precise so we can
figure out precisely where we're wrong
and then evolve it so so i i see
this direction going forward the
possibility of a scientific spirituality
where
we
take a lot of the spiritual insights
that the spiritual traditions the
mystical traditions have had for
thousands of years
and we take the tools that science has
learned by studying our headset
and we use those tools to take the first
step outside the headset that the
spiritual traditions have been telling
us look you guys are stuck in the
headset you're stuck on the headset
well they're right
but by studying the headset we got the
tools we needed to actually step outside
the headset
in a way that can be precise and we can
figure out
what we're doing and make precise
theories and so i see science and spirit
we're at this really interesting
convergence point in human history
where there's been a war between science
and spirituality in effect they've been
at odds these are non-physicalists over
here the spiritual side these are
physicalists over here the scientists
scientists have all the hard-nosed tools
it's all woolly and and imprecise over
here on the spiritual side and so
they've been been at odds at each other
right but now let's take the best
insights i'm not saying that anybody's
right or wrong i'm just saying let's
take the best insights from the
spiritual traditions
and be willing to call nonsense nonsense
and take the best tools from science and
take and also call theories nonsense
that are nonsense
and
try together to make precise theories
about the spiritual realm and our
position you know what are we here for
um
what is life about i mean
these deep deep questions that are all
important to us um and see see where it
goes and and you're right i think that
as we do this
we're going to understand if this idea
that there's a network of conscious
agents outside space time and we begin
to really understand how
in part it works and how it relates to
space time the technologies
that we're going to get are
stunning the the analogy i would think
of is
like this
again going back to grand theft auto you
can imagine being someone who's a a
wizard a grand theft auto we all just
look in awe at what this wizard can do
and that's truly impressive but now
the software engineer comes along who
actually knows the software of the game
and he can take the gasoline out of the
tank or let the tire out of the airs of
the wizard's car so now the wizard is
nothing
compared to someone who knows
how the software works outside of grand
theft auto once we get outside of space
time we understand how this network of
conscious agent works and how space time
is just a visualization tool
we will be in the position of that
software engineer that can actually just
give the grand theft auto wizard a flat
tire we'll be able to
he could change the road he could change
the dimensions of the road he could make
buildings disappear he could make space
and time
shift in any way he wants
that's
the kind of
pandora's box potentially
that we're going to open up here i i
it's both as a scientist and a human
being it's exhilarating and scary as all
get out
um
that in the wrong hands is incredibly
powerful
yes there's so many sort of layers of
guesses between us and there but if um
yeah if people have the ability to
essentially edit the matrix and anybody
can do it then that's going to
certainly go into some pretty
interesting places
before we ponder that though i want to
ask you
what do you think of einstein's
statement that i want to know god's
thoughts everything else is just details
well
there's a sense in which
i
am very much on board with einstein in
some sense
the attitude is i mean
who cares that there are so many kinds
of quarks and who cares that there are
so many kinds of gluons and that the
mass of the electron is such and such
and i mean
that's not what it's really about i mean
we we need to understand those things
but not for their own sake what what
what einstein and
theoretical physicists are really after
is they're trying as einstein said i
want to understand the mind of god right
i want to understand
what are the big deep principles
that would lead to the laws that have as
their consequences there are these kinds
of quirks and these kinds of gluons and
so forth
so it's the deep deep insights the same
kind of thing that you and i are chasing
here when we are talking about ideas
like girdles incompleteness serum and
girdles candy store like these i mean
even if that's not the right idea it
gives you a flavor for the deep kind of
idea that we're after that that we think
of this could be
a deep enough idea that it could be a a
guiding principle for a lot of the
details that we see
so it's in that sense that i would would
agree completely with einstein on that
now i think einstein
um
was very much attached to space and time
he seems fair
yeah
he he was the
perhaps the person with the most
profound original insights ever about
space and time
um i don't know if he ever
let go of space time maybe in his later
years maybe he did i don't know but but
but most of us is really hard
the avant-garde of physics right now are
letting go of space time when you if you
just google
space time is doomed google that phrase
you can find videos by nema arkani hamid
for example and he can tell you exactly
why state of the art physicists today
are saying space time is doomed so the
mind of god whatever it is
is not space time itself
it's something deeper
and but they don't know what that
something deeper is what the physicists
are doing
um
because they don't have any
they don't have any idea
what's beyond space and time what
they're doing which is really brilliant
they're saying let's take the
mathematics
of the models that we do have in space
time quantum field theory
gravity
let's look at that mathematics and see
that mathematics is like a light into
the dark beyond space time can we and
they're flashing that light into the
dark as far as they can let that light
go
so they're they're trying to see what
the structure of our current theories
might tell us to guide us in our ideas
beyond space time but ultimately
we're going to need to make a creative
leap we're going to have to just
and this is the fun of science you make
a creative guess
you make it mathematically precise and
then go back and say okay here's my
guess about what's behind space time
then you have to project it back into
space time where you can test it and so
so so the physicists are doing break
right i'm reading their work very very
carefully because i need to build on
their work i'm trying to plug my theory
of conscious agents i want to show that
the the long-term behavior of conscious
agents so-called asymptotic behavior so
this this is a dynamics on graphs it's a
markovian dynamics and it has an
asymptotic behavior it turns out i
believe i can show that that asymptotic
behavior plugs into
structures that the physicists are
finding called cosmological polytopes
amplitude sociohedron so forth that have
the same kind of permutation properties
that the asymptotic behavior of
consciousness does so the asymptotically
availableness leads to certain
permutations to classify it permutations
turn out to be the fundamental thing
that that the physicists have found
beyond space-time that's as deep as
they've gotten there are these things
called permutations beyond space-time
that lead to what they call on-shell
processes which they can then lead to
predicting the scattering amplitudes so
that's the thread i want to
to pull start with a theory of
consciousness whereas
a vast social network of consciousnesses
its asymptotic behavior is what the
flashlight of physics has seen the
permutations that's as far as they can
go
i mean
long-term behavior so so i'll give you
very very concrete with an example
suppose that you're in your car on the
freeway
and you're driving and there's hundreds
of people on the road with you everybody
it's a conscious person turning the
steering wheel pushing on the gas
hitting the brake and so forth
now imagine you're up in a helicopter
you know half a mile up and you're
looking down you're the channel seven
news
and what you see is a bunch of little
specks little dots moving on the freeway
you don't see any consciousnesses you
could think of it as particle flow a
bunch of particles flowing oh there's a
little the particles are all stopped
here there's a traffic jam and now their
fluid is flowing you could use like
fluid dynamics the kind of math that
physicists use to describe that because
that's the long term behavior you're
looking at it from far far away you
don't see the consciousness
so so you're looking at long-term
behavior not the little turn of the
wheel the stepping on the break of each
person you're looking from very far away
that's asymptotics looking at the
long-term
from a far away distance so that's why
physics has never seen consciousness
first they're studying our headset
not consciousness
and second the headset itself has only
been
designed
to show us the asymptotic behavior of
consciousness because that's how we data
compress right that's this is data
compression i can't see all the twitter
users and what they're tweeting i see
trends
trends are the asymptotics and and so it
turns out when you look at the trend
behavior of consciousness you get these
things
that we
mathematicians call permutations
and that's as far as the so that's what
i'm coming from my side consciousness
asymptotics leads to permutations the
physicists
pointing from the headset of space-time
into the dark
their flashlight gets to permutations so
we're meeting in the middle so that's
what i'm trying to do is to
bridge that gap it'll take a couple
years i'm not a physicist so i'm just
learning as much as i can and i'm
working with physicists but you know
there's a lot of conceptual work to do
there but then this will get back to the
question you raised earlier about
artificial intelligence
once we understand
how this whole thread gets pulled that i
just described from consciousness
through asymptotics into space time
we can reverse engineer
time
and we can open
new portals
in the interface into conscious agents
the conscious agents are there
we'll be able to re re-jig
our interface
to open new portals
and see new aspects of this social
network of conscious agents that we've
never seen before
and maybe some of the technology that we
use to do that will look like circuits
and software i don't know we'll i will
see
and if it does
it would be then in some sense we might
say show sure
ai
with circuits and software
has open we now have consciousness in
that ai but it will be different it will
be not that the circuits and software
and silicon
was the founding thing and it created
the consciousness as an emergent
property
instead we just
circuits and software are the language
of the interface that we use to describe
this much deeper thing we did that
opened up a hole or opened up a portal
in the interface that looks like
circuits and software in our interface
but that's not the truth that's just
what it looks like in our interface the
deeper thing is will something with
conscious agents and how they operate
that will that we'll learn
so let me make sure i understand that so
are you saying that there is
we can create entities that meet some
sort of requirement as to open a portal
to conscious beings
the one that we know how to do now is um
sexual reproduction and i guess asexual
reproduction depending on where you draw
the line of consciousness but we can
make puppies we can make humans
and those the act of that somehow some
way meet some criteria that then exactly
okay and that there is some
configuration that we could do with
robotics or ai or a combination thereof
that would open a similar portal
you've got it exactly right tom we we
have as you just pointed out we have
proof
that our interface does have the
technology to open new portals it's
pretty low where do we have that proof
when you have a kid
okay okay it's a low tech right right
it's low tech but we know what happens
we enjoy the process but but we have
technology in other words our interface
has proven that it's got the technology
to open new portals
well now the question is if we can
understand what's really going on there
we should be able to do it and it may
look like ai
um and this may also be an answer to a
very very deep question about um
alien intelligences what where are they
well
we're looking at our headset
of course we can't see them
that's interesting they're out there
that's really interesting
that's
i'm not saying we won't find some of
them out there our headset may give us
access to certain alien intelligences on
planets around alpha centauri and so
forth but
it's going to be trivial compared to all
the consciousnesses that are out there
that's what a headset is for it's there
to hide
all of the consciousnesses because it
would be overwhelming to interact with
them so that's where they are they're
all around us
we're like ants that don't see the guy
with the raid can coming at them they
can't they just can't see it right um so
they're all around us but we're we are
stuck on our headset
and we think that we're the
the epitome of of advancement and
knowledge and and so forth might
it would be funny and it may be the case
that every
that that's
a rookie mistake that every
consciousness goes through in a
simulator
that it thinks it because it's headset
is only going to give it
the best access to itself and others
like it and less access to others and so
in its own eyes it will always be the
wisest
in its in its environment and so it may
be a rookie mistake
that every
simulator
the consciousness creates
has that we all have to go through this
phase of going oh we're the best we're
the greatest we're the epitome of
evolution and then we slowly realize oh
no no no no i'm in a simulator and
there's you know there's this infinite
range of other possibilities of
consciousness
some so profound that i that i if i
could see them i won't be you know
inclined to fall down and worship them
who knows you know just so but but it's
a really humbling position so we go from
being the top of creation the the the
smarter
the brain is the most
incredibly complicated thing we've ever
found in the entire universe that point
of view to oh wow um
we've made a rookie mistake here um
there are consciousnesses out there that
are far more you know
mind-blowing than anything i could even
concretely imagine so it's it's a very
very different kind of thing and this
also by the way puts a different spin on
the the question of
life living versus non-living
how so i struggled with this the first
time i heard you bring it up dead still
feels dead to me
how does it uh
right because you're saying the very
thing that i perceive as them is
uh the consciousness coming through the
portal and if i could re-track down that
bit of consciousness it would be just
like
dealing with
timmy
well in that direction
so that's the right direction and and by
the way you know
i don't know the answer so you might be
closer than me so i'm so it's when i say
the right direction uh close to what i'm
thinking and maybe you're right and and
better
better than mine an analogy i think
that's that's useful here is again a
virtual reality and i like you know say
you you go with a bunch of buddies to um
a virtual reality arcade put on headset
and bodysuit and to play virtual
volleyball
and so you find yourself immersed in a
beach scene with the beach volleyball
court and so forth and you start playing
beach volleyball for a little while and
then your friend joe says shoot me for a
minute i'm thirsty i'll get a drink so
he takes off his headset and bodysuit to
get a drink and his avatar
collapses motionless on the sand
from the point of view of the vr game
he's effectively dead he's he's
unplugged
but
he's just unplugged from the headset
he's not dead and so if space-time isn't
fundamental
death may be nothing more what we call
death is just unplugging from the
headset now what the consequences of
that are for consciousness
for example
maybe consciousness survives what we
call death but maybe the notion of a
self of me maybe that doesn't survive i
don't know this is going to be
i don't want to be doctrinaire about
this i want to
be open to you know first having bold
ideas
you have to be crazy and drink beer have
some ideas and then then when you're
sober you go back and you start you know
okay let's that looked really great when
i will you know when a gin and tonic but
now it doesn't look so great when i'm
sober right so so you have to do you
know explore but then go back so we want
our mathematical model of consciousness
to give us insights
what is a self
what is this thing that i call a self
will that survive detachment from an
interface or is that itself somehow
wedded to the interface what is the
relationship between my interface my
space-time interface and my notion of
self i'm really attached to this body
but this body
is just a symbol
you know
i i am not this i want to get into
something really fast so one thing that
i find very confusing not confusing i
um i understand it and there's some part
of my brain is rejecting it so what i
what i like about the reductionist model
of quantum mechanics and all of that is
that um
there is something beyond what all
shorthand to personality
so a gluon is a glue and is a glue one
right it's just a particle and it acts
in a certain way according to certain
laws and i can get that things acting in
a certain way according to certain laws
as they group up into more and more
complex things those more and more
complex things are now the amalgamation
of all these different laws and they
look like humans oh my gosh look at that
and but as i
break them down they die the immune
system stops fighting off bugs they
return to a different anatomical state
let's call it dirt and now they're
reacting in a different way but then
those could be consumed by something
that ends up becoming a piece of you
know the egg and then the egg is
re-fertilized and now you actually
become something again and so we're just
we're these set number of particles that
sort of take different forms break apart
take a different form again and and it
makes sense to me largely because there
are things beyond personality
personality is only associated with
things that take a very particular
form the sort of living biological
things as we would call it and there the
individual pieces exist outside of that
and that's reflected back to me because
if i go and give somebody brain damage
they will act fundamentally different
right
um deny somebody oxygen for a certain
period of time but then don't let them
die and they will be fundamentally
different
and so it's like everything in the
simulation i fully understand that
but
having lived in the simulation all of
that makes a lot of sense
now when i try to
imagine come up with a metaphor whatever
where consciousness is primary and this
may just be a failing of my brain is so
primed
to think of
consciousness as being an element of
personality
that it just falls apart as i try to
imagine okay wait while this
consciousness is in this body it has
personality and i can [__] up its
personality and make it act
fundamentally different but hey when you
come back out
one of two things has to be true either
its fundamental nature was different
than its manifestation as timmy
and so it was like hey you were timmy
for a while oh you got damaged but
you're still you and timmy's messed up
now but i can pull you out and you'd be
just like you were before but if i as
little tommy come and re-engage with the
consciousness that was part of timmy i
wouldn't recognize this person at all so
even if they're into me normal they come
out of timmy timmy's still normal i
still wouldn't get this person or the
consciousness because
and this is where again my brain just
immediately starts grabbing a hold of
metaphor so my brain goes okay cool i
get this the consciousness is like a
puppet master and the very act of taking
on the body
right so pregnancy cool you got a baby
at some point the puppet master brings
consciousness to that
puppet and now that that consciousness
gets to experience the girdles infinite
candy store range of
um
states of consciousness of qualia and
goes oh wow cool what a neat ride as i
experience this oh this gets damaged it
just changes my experience of what this
looks this is what sally was like before
the brain damage this is what grapes
taste like to her now that she's had
catastrophic brain injury how
interesting and
that's where i'm like
one of those two interpretations is
way off
because i can't reconcile
them both now because i've lived my
entire life
in the headset it just makes so much
more sense to me
that
individual parts act one way
when they come together they act another
way i mean it's just
that's the human body right if you're
just looking at bacteria it feels very
different if you're just looking at
mitochondria it's very different if
you're looking at me without bacteria
different me without mitochondria i'm
dead first of all and it's only as you
bring all these together that i actually
act the way that i act so i understand
how i am this i am you know a totality
uh uh i don't wanna put words in your
mouth but it's very poetic and super
interesting a small g god right of
something that is like the accumulation
of trillions of things that have come
together in this pretty
amazing
form right that is delicate and precious
and would never want anything to happen
to it but obviously does not rule the
universe and you know just trying to get
through the day
uh but you know very interesting as you
if you define god as a collection little
g god as a collection of these
individual consciousnesses that have
come together to create this sort of
symphony that we recognize as a cheetah
or a person or a gorilla or whatever
um
that
i
get that to me is very interesting when
i start thinking as consciousness as
fundamental i start i make the mistake
that i read that as personality as
fundamental
right the first interpretation is the
one that i i agree with you about that
the consciousnesses come together to
create new varieties of consciousnesses
and it's
um
a very novel and creative process and
all i mean when i say consciousness is
fundamental is that it's not space and
time and physical stuff that's the
fundamental thing is that
these kinds of consciousnesses that can
combine to create new forms of
consciousness is that's the direction
that science needs to go to try to
understand what's really the fundamental
dynamics of what's going on how is it
that two consciousnesses when they
interact create a new consciousness and
their right by the way we can get some
information like from the split brain
patients that we talked about last time
right
there are people that have the
the common generation
yeah the corpus callosum is cut
and in one case the left hemisphere
believed in god and the right hemisphere
was an atheist
left hemisphere wanted to be a draftsman
right hemisphere wanted to be a race car
driver completely different personality
so what consciousness is doing in that
case is what happens when i put an
atheist
together with a believer in god and make
the
the believer in god also want to be a
draftsman and the atheist also want to
be a race car driver what kind of new
consciousness do i get when i put those
two together and put a corpus callosum
between them and force them to live
together in a lifetime what new how do
they so the adjudication of that and
we all sort of sometimes will feel like
you know it's friday night part of me
wants to do this i'd like to you know
kick up my heels and have some fun part
of me wants to be a geek and study some
more physics whatever it might be
maybe those are really two separate
consciousnesses two separate conscious
agents that are negotiating and in the
process of new consciousness it exists
this is where i come back to i'm so into
that idea from einstein and this may not
be what he meant and maybe i'm just
doing a poetic interpretation but i want
to know god's thoughts or the mind of
god everything else is just details is
like i want to know
what what imbued these conscious
entities with
any
propellant like what makes them step
through the portal are there times of
their life [__] it no i don't want to
step through the portal i just want to
do my version of a friday night chilling
over here you know because when you
think about two conscious entities
coming together
one
it is
they are you get very distinct and
predictable
types of consciousness depending on
whether it's right hemisphere or left
hemisphere and so
it is obviously not you
can very quickly oversimplify but it
they're different right one side is
going to be prone to religiosity and the
other side would be prone to not like
that's predictable you wouldn't get i
forget which is right or left but like
whichever has the propensity for
religiosity you're never going to get it
that the other side has a propensity
like if i told you hey vs roma chandran
who studied the hell out of this like uh
hey one of the sides is religious he's
not gonna be like oh my god i have no
idea it's 50 50. he's gonna be like oh
that's the left or the right whichever
it is so
now it's like this [__] is so tied to
the physicality that exists in my
headset
that it's like teasing out
what is
the the what is the thought of god what
is the thing like what's the game being
played here like why why is there a
puppet master you know what i mean like
it's exactly so interesting you know uh
absolutely tom and that's the spirit in
which scientists are
and i'm approaching this right we're
saying let's we try to reverse engineer
exactly these kinds of things what do we
find from the neurosciences split brain
patients what clues can we get to what's
really going on outside the headset so
but the first thing you have to do is
realize i have to think outside the
headset so i have to let go of the
reductionist view
and say how are neurons doing this and
saying it's instead let's talk about
consciousness on its own terms what's
consciousness doing and and then the
neural structures that i'm seeing i have
to think about them okay this is just my
virtual reality
interface how can i reinterpret all
these neural networks and what they're
doing in terms of what networks of
conscious agents are really doing
in other words it's much harder work
conceptually i spend a lot of time
thinking about this do you have a method
for getting breakthroughs is it really a
gin and tonic and then go organize your
ideas does it go jogging
like how do you
do this well um it's
i have several things i do on a daily
basis and i'm i'm grateful to my wife
for giving me some space to do it
i meditate for several hours
okay
three hours a day typically whoa
and you are pursuing the lack of thought
or you're pursuing to let your mind
chase a thought
entire silence
nothing but silence
and watching what happens there it's
very the the idea
from my geeky point of view about it
is
if i'm going to go beyond the interface
then i've got to let go of the interface
entirely
any concept any thought that i have is
by definition still in the language in
the interface that i've got
so going into utter
and total silence
is
not easy
and it's both exhilarating and
terrifying because there are no security
blankets
when you let go of all thoughts
and if you so one thing i do is i watch
myself and i watch
the terror
and i watch my mind jumping back and
clinging to the things that it knows
and but then i also noticed that
i've been doing this for 18 and a half
years
and
the process to me
the best
metaphor i can think of for it is to
describe it as like metamorphosis
like so you think about you know a
caterpillar goes into a chrysalis and
then comes out a butterfly how beautiful
it's all lovely and so forth but what
really goes on is that inside the
chrysalis
there's a war
the immune cells of the caterpillar
fight to the death
the cells in the in inside that are
responsible for turning it into a
butterfly and it's only when the immune
cells of the caterpillar are completely
overwhelmed
that the transformation takes place and
everything that the caterpillar knew
eating green leaves crawling on a bunch
of different legs having little
furry spikes come out of you having a
mouth that everything that it knows
it has to let go
talk about terror
and
the the
the analogy of the terror and that seems
to be the immune system is fighting this
until the immune system is completely
overwhelmed it's not like all peace and
love it fights until it can't fight
anymore and that's the way
meditation seems to me
it seems like the the letting go of what
i know letting go of the caterpillar and
seeing what new forms of consciousness
might come and seeing how it might be
transformed is both exhilarating and
terrifying but it's certainly
transforming so that's one thing that do
you set do you set a different intention
when you sit down to meditate like today
i'm going to try to
think about like what these conscious
agents look like no
i i seek only silence and everything
else
to let go of everything i know
that's the one intention is
let go of this headset
let go of this headset what do you do
when your grocery shopping needs pop
into your head
um well i can tell you what i did what
i've done for a lot of the time i
you beat yourself up you go you know
what's stupid why don't you how come you
can't be into this and then eventually i
just you over
years and years and years you learned to
just go
c'est la vie
back to silence
say levy back to silence and just go
back there and and
the weird thing about it is
the caterpillar can't know
what it's turning into
and it has no idea what it's like to
have wings and a proboscis instead of a
mouth and to drink nectar instead of eat
leaves it can't know
it has to go completely into the unknown
and so
it's being good
with
letting go of everything that's
known
and letting yourself venture into the
totally unknown
so that's one aspect of it the other
aspect is i spend as much time as i
possibly can studying mathematics
listening to what the physicists are i
are saying i've
um nima arkani hamad gave a course at
harvard in fall of 2019 to the graduate
students on the state of play and
scattering amplitudes
i've
literally transcribed
by hand on my computer 17 of his
lectures word for
and i'm studying them i'm not a
physicist but i
um and i don't have the talents that
these guys do but i have incredible
motivation and i really want to
understand this stuff so and i've got a
physicist friend uh chaitan prakash
who's really good so shaytan and i meet
and and he helps me through it he's also
interested um and we're working on this
mathematics together so i spend hours
every day
studying physics studying mathematics of
course studying cognitive neuroscience
artificial intelligence the tools that
are needed here this is
this is a truly multi-disciplinary task
to go all the way from the theory of
consciousness
through its asymptotic behavior through
cosmological polytopes into
these
on-shell diagrams into space-time and
quantum field theory um and then to the
large hadron
but then eventually to climb up to life
and chemistry and neural neuroscience
and psychology
to get the big picture i mean i can't
get the whole thing but i'm just trying
to get the thread that goes all the way
through that's that's my goal can i pull
a thread all the way through
that we can then start to build on and
so it's truly multidisciplinary and so i
have to think out of the box
um all the time so the meditation is
very very helpful to just let go of the
box completely
but then
the weird thing about this and this may
be some clue
as well to something deep about the
whole picture
there seems to be reward
for
absolute silence
no concepts whatsoever
and
absolute precision
on the other hand
and there's no reward for sloppy
thinking in the middle
so but
silence
and precision
see and we see this in quantum
computation which is really quite
interesting in quantum computation
when you build a quantum computer
on the one hand
we use the most absolute precise theory
and mathematics we've ever had quantum
quantum theory to build we use quantum
information theory we build these so
this is just like the epitome of sharp
thinking and everything has to be
precise
and once you set up the quantum bits and
gates
and start the computation
now
the other side happens
you have to let go completely
you can't intervene you can't touch the
thing in any way if you interfere in any
way
you destroy the computation
so you have on the one hand absolute
precision the best that you can do in
your interface
and then you step away and you don't
touch it with anything in your interface
at all
and that's when the horsepower is
unleashed and after that and that's
where the quantum computation power
comes and then at the end you can look
at the quantum bits and gates and get a
small symbol full of the whole rush of
computation that went on there so so
there's this this very interesting thing
i'm trying to understand it
precision
doing the best precise thinking you can
with the current
cognitive tools that you've been given
letting go of those cognitive tools all
together
going into complete silence those two
seem to be really
critical and somehow they come together
in quantum computation precision and
then don't touch anybody who's a
programmer for classical computing right
you know that if you write a program you
like to put little tracers in the
program to see what it's doing while
while it's computing you know to debug
it to see you know what what went wrong
you can't trace a quantum computer that
way if you trace it you brought you you
break the
power that's really weird
so there's that kind so you can see why
i'm thinking out of the box i'm really
trying to think in terms of metaphors
how does this this weird thing about
quantum computation relate to my own
experience as a scientist doing precise
thinking or best i can with no thinking
in meditation how does that relate to
quant this is the kind of the out-of-box
analogies that may lead you nowhere but
it also may lead you to to insights as
long as you are don't hold on to
anything dogmatically right is that's
the sort of the point
explore
and then be the first to kill off the
things that uh you know really don't
make sense don't hold on to them so it's
an anti-dogmatic
point of view but
but and yet
the balance is to be as excited and
energetic and having fun so that you
want to do it right you have to
it's a balance you have to have the
energy to go i really want to do this
today i'm going to study all this math
because i might learn something i might
actually break through here and on the
other hand to not cling to anything you
got i'm probably wrong i'm probably
wrong probably wrong
that's the balance to to to having all
of this stuff and it's possible but
but it's really interesting to see how
the mind
goes into dogmatism
very it goes into safety
i think they're maybe the same thing
that's interesting
really could be the same thing so so
those are two of the things i do and
then i do a lot of exercise like i i
it's just the case that in this
interface
if your
body is not physically fit
then you're not going to be at the peak
of your mental power so i
have a workout regimen every day of the
week i do either an hour of weight
training
or an hour and a half of some kind of
mild aerobic stuff
and i alternate days um so so it's and
then i spend time you know with my my
wife and my family and you know
kid and grandkids and and and so forth
and enjoy
um this part of a girl's candy store
right
i love that donald man this was so much
fun i i really really enjoy spending
time with you um i have no doubt we will
do a round three at some point
thank you so much for coming back where
can people get your book
tell people about the book where you
want them to connect with you oh yes
it's called the case against reality um
you can get it on amazon or apple and so
forth the case against reality um and
then i've got a twitter feed um at
donald
d hoffman i think but if you just google
my name on twitter you can find it and i
put links to most of my to to i'll put a
link to our podcast here and and so
forth but
um and
yeah so on twitter and you know i have a
website at the university of california
at irvine that lists some of my papers
and has my email um ddhoff uci.edu so
people can email me i i you know i get
enough that i can't respond to most of
the emails but but
every once in a while i can respond so
nice you know what that's like i'm sure
i i do indeed all right cool well guys
check him out for sure hopefully you
enjoyed this and if you loved it be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
[Music]
you